The Project Gutenberg eBook of The taste of honey
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The taste of honey
        The note book of a linguist


Author: Edna Worthley Underwood

Release date: October 15, 2023 [eBook #71882]

Language: English

Original publication: Portland, ME: The Mosher Press, 1930

Credits: Tim Lindell, John Campbell and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This book was produced from images made available by the HathiTrust Digital Library.)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE TASTE OF HONEY ***




  TRANSCRIBER’S NOTE

  Italic text is denoted by _underscores_.

  Some minor changes to the text are noted at the end of the book.




                          THE TASTE OF HONEY

                     THE NOTE BOOK OF A LINGUIST




                                 THE
                            TASTE OF HONEY

                     THE NOTE BOOK OF A LINGUIST

                      BY EDNA WORTHLEY UNDERWOOD


                            [Illustration]


                            PORTLAND MAINE
                           THE MOSHER PRESS
                              MDCCCCXXX




                              COPYRIGHT
                       EDNA WORTHLEY UNDERWOOD
                                 1930


             Manufactured in the United States of America




                         TO THREE PROSATEURS

                   LOTI, BLANCO-FOMBONA, D’ANNUNZIO




                             _FOREWORD_


The Taste of Honey _is a genuine diary, of somewhat the same kind as_
De Vigny’s Journal d’un Poète, _or_ Diary of a Kentish Gentleman,
_in that it was not written for public approval, but for personal
pleasure. It is not dated nor arranged in order, partly because it
was jotted down upon loose leaves which were threaded upon a string;
partly because of the period of years covered and the vicissitudes
that befall perishable substances such as paper._

_Part was written at the age of sixteen, eighteen; part recently.
Many pages have been lost; indeed as recently as the spring of 1928 a
manuscript of over three hundred pages disappeared from the office of
a New York magazine. Some notes from this are included however._

_Selections from the Note Book have been published, in both French
and English_, Le Disque Vert _of Belgium carried pages, when Hellens
was director. American papers have carried other pages._

_It has not been edited nor changed for publication. It is the
unreserved expression of what was in the reader’s mind, set down with
malice toward none and always with sincerity._




                          THE TASTE OF HONEY

                     THE NOTE BOOK OF A LINGUIST




                          THE TASTE OF HONEY

                     THE NOTE BOOK OF A LINGUIST


Goethe wrote: _Was ich litt und was ich lebte, sind hier Blumen nur
im Strausz._ I paraphrase: _Was ich lese und was ich denke, hab ich
hier bewahrt für mich._ (What I read and what I think I have stored
up here for myself.)


This sentence from one of Concha Espina’s novels pleased me: _Acaso
han huido para siempre en el mundo las aves altarnaras de la
Humanidad._ (Perhaps vanished forever from the earth are the heavenly
wings of humanity.) That is what Spanish thinkers declare that we
lack more than anything else, human values.


Byron and Shelley created merely to console themselves for the fact
that they could not learn how to live. To them a man of action was
something strange, something enviable.


Maurois’s _Ariel_ (Shelley) is satisfying and unsatisfying at the
same time. I feel some of it might be better. It lacks substance,
and yet it is pleasant reading enough. The book is semi-fiction;
it was not meant to be yard-wide fact. But I keep the feeling of
being forced to look at a water-color when I am longing for a rich,
deep-pigmented oil. There is something I want and can not find. It is
bad form however to look a fact too firmly in the face.

What was really wrong with the lives of Shelley and Byron, and
some of their delightful friends, was the influence in cold, Saxon
England, with its peculiar ability to cling to a straight line and
ignore the nimble necessity of comers, of the French Eighteenth
Century. It made the duller English mad. They did not put on well the
mental clothes of French thought and philosophy. As a race they have
never been too successful in putting on any clothes.

They lacked humor and a kind of emotional release in the wearing.
The clothes did not fit. But they thundered ahead with desperate
earnestness, and neglected the gay occasional dandying trot. British
seriousness minus Gallic salt.

An English woman of cultivation and good intent, in America,
recently showed the same peculiarity. She started a movement to
suppress Mother Goose. She insisted the book would teach children to
lie, to distrust their elders. The following is one of her quoted
illustrations:

      The little dog laughed to see such a farce
      And the cow jumped over the moon.

The estimable, (and as it happens good looking woman), asserts
truthfully, that cows have not the habit of jumping over the moon and
that it is wrong to tell it to children.

She writes an article on the subject. She asks intervention of the
Press to back her statement that she has never seen a cow jump over
the moon. No one doubted her!

It did not occur to her the line is nonsense. Such writing is escape
from the prison of fact. Mother Goose is art of its kind. In a subway
city, of course, it is not easy to think of such exhibits—nor of
anything the other side of wit. It is being witty in good form—which
is the good form the polite English have overlooked. It registers by
what it is not—_like English wit_. Referring again to Maurois’ book,
one can not help being grateful for another glimpse of the bodily
beauty of Byron, of Shelley.


That delightful short story writer of Venezuela—Pedro-Emilio Coll,
was influenced deeply in boyhood by the sensuous, the finished
prose-technique of d’Annunzio. Who would not be, who could both read
and appreciate it? Coll could not forget it. It may have helped to
the commendable control he holds.

In the Eighteen Eighties, Venezuela had some _cuentistas_, whose
style, whose imaginative reach, was above the ordinary. Some of these
men could command a prose-surface greater than anyone save Hearne,
who was not American, but Irish and Greek. Latin people of the South
keep an art-sense, a kind of _finura_, that we of more mixed blood
to the north, have not. Spanish blood is having a second, a royal
flowering down there.

_Opopomax_, by Coll, is the story of a perfume. Aside from owning an
idea, this and his other stories have trained workmanship. It is well
done. I sometimes wonder if the novel ever reaches quite the same
intensity—the perfect fluidity of dissolving vision, as the short
story.

On this pallid, dove-grey morning of winter, I have finished
Blanco-Fombona’s _Man of Iron_, (_El Hombre de Hierro_). Fombona was
born in Venezuela too, like Coll, but now he is living in Europe. He
was in prison in Ciudad, Bolivia—1905, when he wrote this book.

In France they say of him:—“A tender soul whom no emotion leaves
indifferent.” Fombona remarks that Herbert Spencer calls us _hybrid
beings_, with all the defects of hybridism. Once Rubén Darío wrote
a glorious appreciation of Fombona, as Rodo wrote one equally fine
of Darío. He declared: “My friend, Rufino, was born only to realize
great things.” Darío is dead now; when he was writing so eloquently
about his friend he was in Mallorca—and happy. _Alas!_

There is a Portuguese critic in South America—in Rio—by name José
Verissimo, who remarks that America was colonized at one of the most
powerful moments of European mind, and that this nature of explorers,
_conquistadores_, the something epic that makes poets, still lives in
Blanco-Fombona.

His novels have conquered two worlds; the Old and the New. Spain was
enthusiastic. Like Columbus, Fombona set her dreaming of a New World.
A young Spaniard says: “... When I think of Fombona I connect his
name with the charm of the city where he lived, Caracas ... the name
of that city remains a mythological place to me—remote, perfumed,
mysterious, a city which Fate will have it, that I shall sometime
see. How I have lingered over Fombona’s pages, when they picture
the sun of gold in that sky of azure; dawn-fresh, mountain mornings
that are chill; the romantic song of old bells in old towers; the
iced-water Americans drink ... lots and lots of things that suit my
dream-city, city made for adventure and love, and ill luck....”

Hear Blanco-Fombona for a moment himself: (I am translating from
memory)—... “and more important than everything else, more important
than people, than events, that brilliant sun of America, toward which
the breath of our lives ascends continually, like prayer....”

It is not true that the characters of _Man of Iron_ are commonplace
as the critics keep calling them. It is because Fombona has looked
down upon them from a great height. From such height, perhaps, all
the little figures in the game—_life_—are small and commonplace.

I can not forget his sentences. They sing on and on in my mind. They
have the charm of smooth satin. They feel good upon my tongue. _La
luna—de esas claras lunas_.... The moon—one of those clear moons of
tropic nights—was laughing down upon the water. Here is another:

_In the sky the little stars were twinkling, while afar I could hear
the night-thunder of the Carib Sea._

Fombona’s life has been worth while; poetic, enriched with vision,
with conscious power—in Caracas, the city of his delight. It is
something I like to think about. I can measure its invigorating pulse
in his prose. I have esteem for the artist, and admiration for the
man and brave fighter, who has never been a coward.

In _Man of Iron_, Fombona makes the character which is both pitiful
and noble, a man, just as Manuel Galvez does in one of his latest
novels—_La Pasión de la Pampa_. And Fombona like Manuel Galvez
registered so many of the apparently trifling, overlooked facts
that knit up the confusing surface of the present; it resembles the
difficult-to-catch, changeful, spread-out shimmer upon a sea.

South Americans picture youth, and the joys of youth, as no one else.
One can live over one’s own youth, and then multiple other youths
by proxy, in the reading. And every once in a while I come upon a
sentence that shakes me with its splendor.

I am impressed by the fact that the literatures that Fombona reads
and likes best are French, Italian, Russian. He sought literatures
which could inspire him, which held the contagion of heat, Saxon
races are colder, weaker perhaps in art-sense. They peg along
diligently—more pedantically—with the consuming of many words like a
faulty engine giving out smoke. I am carrying along as I say this, an
undercurrent of memory of the stories of the English Buchan, which
are so deadly dull; uninspired; devoid of artistry, of life. To me
his books are sediment ... after sometime, somewhere, the pure, the
sparkling wine has been withdrawn. Only rare humorless Americans
could read them.

The great earthquake in Caracas as Blanco-Fombona shows it to us, is
masterly. And over it, the calm of night, and the yellow, resplendent
moon of the tropics. I had a thrill from this chapter.

Fombona was fascinated by the racial problem of the Americas, just
as I have been. He insists the great problem here is racial. To
quote him: “There is no racial unity, and consequently no national
ideal.... We may not depend upon them of mixed blood, because now
one element predominates, and now another, which education breaks
up and still more confuses. Out of three Venezuelans—white, negro,
and Indian, who could tell what could blend their energies into one?
In each case the ideals are different; they have different tastes,
different political impulses. We have no national soul.”

One of Fombona’s friends in old Spain, tells us how greatly Fombona
is repelled by a commercial, highly mechanized civilization, because
such things go against the grain of his exalted subjectivity, his
belief in the spiritual elite. He says Fombona hates equally what he
calls _Teutonic force_ and prosaic, Yankee-loving money-grubbing.
And especially he hates democracies, because they are arbitrary,
leveling, destructive of the aristocrat—_and North Americans_. _La
Lámpara de Aladino_ might be termed the breviary of his prejudices.

Somehow it makes me think—_The Man of Iron_—of youthful books by
Turgéniev, such as _Father and Sons_, _Spring Floods_ ... all show
drawing without obtruding outline. There is some similar spiritual
quality in the minds that were creating. In his two novels, he is the
equal of the great Russian. I like the sheer power of the man! His
steel-sharp delineations are memorable. And it has some of the same
kind of power as Balzac.

The companion novel—_Man of Gold_, (_El Hombre de Oro_).

The chapter in which the three old ladies take pitiful farewell of
the grand home of their ancestors, the rich, many-roomed, ancient
colonial mansion, with its courts, with its flowers, is a fine piece
of writing. It moved me deeply. Not many see the world we are forced
to live in as clearly as Fombona, with all the different parts in
reasonable and logical relation, not to mention the fine flashing
forth to others, the lifting power of vision, that dazzles, then
creates. There is both grandeur and fury in the soul of Fombona.

There was a short story writer in Venezuela-Caracas, in the late
Eighties, whom I liked. Alejandro Fernandez Garcia. I am still on the
watch for the short story of power. Hear this description of music
from a story by Garcia. (Again I am translating and quoting from
memory.)

“They played a _joropo_. From the rough, coarse, toil-worn fingers
there spread out across the sensitive chords of the instrument, the
flower of Venezuelan music. A flower made of race-blood, old age
and its dreams; music that had come from very far away, from the
inexplainable melancholy of our Carib Fathers—music, indolent and
brutal, love-lustful, and cruel; music dripping through the clear
nights of tropic moons like tears down the black faces of fugitive
women ... plaintive, filled with rebellion and energy, like flame of
hatred across the fragile cane, then again thunderous, a fitting call
of bronze for war across the spaces.... In the _joropo_ dwells the
soul of our fatherland.... It is a sepulchre to guard the ashes of
our dead.”

Again Garcia, enamored of music, writes: “Listen I tell you! Here
comes a Creole waltz-song. _Ah_—how many times I have heard this
song float languid and ardent like our Creole women on the sad and
indifferent arms of lovers, heard it float on like a sparkling
diamond-gas, across the surface of sleeping night-water ... seen it
take on life and glow in the deep eyes of ranchmen at the _rodeo_ ...
in the dimming twilights of the solemn pampa.”


Passion, emotion, such as this is what I seek in story art. Cheap
work does not know it. Garcia has written two books I commend. They
are _Búcares en Flor_ and _Oro de Alquimia_. These books hold the
prose, great poets make sometimes in youth ... but seldom twice.
Never in the twilight of years, because regret, although it may own a
light all its own, can not gild like joy.

De Cela writes interestingly of Lima:

“_Lima!_ Your legends and your women are beautiful. Your palaces
romance-freighted and imposing; your cathedrals mysterious and
solemn. In your streets dwell the Middle Age, and the age-old soul of
Spain.”